substrate/README.md, before:

# Substrate

## Terminology

- **Relay chain**: The Polkadot super chain which is connected to different parachains.
- **Parachain**: The side-chains which are connected to the main Polkadot relay chain.
- **Collator**: Validator for Polkadot parachain
- **Substrate runtime**: It's like `wasm`, `bytecode` for other blockchain networks.

## ink!

## Comparo with EVM

| EVM Stack                          |
| ---------------------------------- |
| ![EVM stack](../img/evm_stack.png) |

| Substrate Stack                 |
| ------------------------------- |
| ![](../img/substrate_stack.png) |

![](../img/evm_vs_substrate_opcodes.png)

## Why Rust

- Able to write safe code, at compile-time (done using `$ cargo check`), rather than run-time failures in C++
- Fast
- High level compared to C++

> NOTE: Any language can be chosen for Substrate. Parity, Web3 foundation is inclined towards Rust.

## Architecture

![](../img/substrate_arch.png)

Substrate is modular & extensive. Each module is called "Pallet".

## Coding

### Pallet

**Start a chain with given/custom runtime**:

- If needs to create a substrate node, then go to `substrate::bin/node/runtime/` & use the codebase. All pallets are used.
- If needs to use a substrate node template, then go to `substrate::bin/node-template/runtime/` & use the codebase. Here, limited pallets are used.
- If needs to create a chain with your own runtime, then just go to `runtime/src/lib.rs` & write your own code.

---

**pallets**: `sudo`, `system`

- `sudo` pallet gives the root permission. It's like `sudo` in Linux. It's more like a on-chain governance.
- `system` pallet is the most important pallet without which no other pallet would work. Infact, it's the core pallet.
- `origin` is the account which is sending the transaction i.e. the caller of the transaction. These are the possible origin values:
  - `None`: For unsigned transactions
  - `Signed`: For signed transactions
  - `Root`: For transactions which are sent by the root
    ![](../img/origin_values.png)

Get who is making the call here:

```rs
let who = ensure_signed(origin)?;
```

---

**Recovery pallet**

## Tutorials

Try out the following tutorials:

- [kitties-tutorial](https://learn.figment.io/tutorials/substrate-kitties-setup), [doc in PDF](tuts/Figment%20Learn%20_%20Substrate%20Kitties%20-%20Basic%20Setup.pdf)

## Repositories

- [zhubaiyuan/awesome-substrate](https://github.com/zhubaiyuan/awesome-substrate)

## References

- [Documentation | By Parity](https://docs.substrate.io/main-docs/)
- [Substrate StackExchange](https://substrate.stackexchange.com/)

### Videos

- [Substrate: A Rustic Vision for Polkadot by Gavin Wood at Web3 Summit 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0IoUZdDi5Is)
- [Chainlink | Intro to Substrate](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o5ANk0sRxEY)

Commit message:

eth2.0 shards compared to parachain

substrate/README.md, after:

# Substrate

## Terminology

- **Relay chain**: The Polkadot super chain which is connected to different parachains.
- **Parachain**: The side-chains which are connected to the main Polkadot relay chain. They are more like shards in ETH 2.0.
- **Collator**: Validator for Polkadot parachain
- **Substrate runtime**: It's like `wasm`, `bytecode` for other blockchain networks.

## ink!

## Comparo with EVM

| EVM Stack                          |
| ---------------------------------- |
| ![EVM stack](../img/evm_stack.png) |

| Substrate Stack                 |
| ------------------------------- |
| ![](../img/substrate_stack.png) |

![](../img/evm_vs_substrate_opcodes.png)

## Why Rust

- Able to write safe code, at compile-time (done using `$ cargo check`), rather than run-time failures in C++
- Fast
- High level compared to C++

> NOTE: Any language can be chosen for Substrate. Parity, Web3 foundation is inclined towards Rust.

## Architecture

![](../img/substrate_arch.png)

Substrate is modular & extensive. Each module is called "Pallet".

## Coding

FRAME is itself a programming language. It's a DSL (Domain Specific Language) for writing Substrate runtime, pallets.

### Pallet

**Start a chain with given/custom runtime**:

- If needs to create a substrate node, then go to `substrate::bin/node/runtime/` & use the codebase. All pallets are used.
- If needs to use a substrate node template, then go to `substrate::bin/node-template/runtime/` & use the codebase. Here, limited pallets are used.
- If needs to create a chain with your own runtime, then just go to `runtime/src/lib.rs` & write your own code.

---

**pallets**: `sudo`, `system`

- `sudo` pallet gives the root permission. It's like `sudo` in Linux. It's more like a on-chain governance.
- `system` pallet is the most important pallet without which no other pallet would work. Infact, it's the core pallet.
- `origin` is the account which is sending the transaction i.e. the caller of the transaction. These are the possible origin values:
  - `None`: For unsigned transactions
  - `Signed`: For signed transactions
  - `Root`: For transactions which are sent by the root
    ![](../img/origin_values.png)

Get who is making the call here:

```rs
let who = ensure_signed(origin)?;
```

---

**Recovery pallet**

## Tutorials

Try out the following tutorials:

- [kitties-tutorial](https://learn.figment.io/tutorials/substrate-kitties-setup), [doc in PDF](tuts/Figment%20Learn%20_%20Substrate%20Kitties%20-%20Basic%20Setup.pdf)

## Repositories

- [zhubaiyuan/awesome-substrate](https://github.com/zhubaiyuan/awesome-substrate)

## References

- [Documentation | By Parity](https://docs.substrate.io/main-docs/)
- [Substrate StackExchange](https://substrate.stackexchange.com/)

### Videos

- [Substrate: A Rustic Vision for Polkadot by Gavin Wood at Web3 Summit 2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0IoUZdDi5Is)
- [Chainlink | Intro to Substrate](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o5ANk0sRxEY)
